12 BugBook: Common pitfalls and practical recommendations for chemical analysis of insect biomass 
Abstract

The rapid growth of the insect industry as a sustainable solution for feed, food, and biomaterials highlights the urgent need for standardised chemical analyses of insect biomass. Currently, the lack of standardised protocols has led to researchers employing diverse methodologies they perceive as most appropriate. This variability introduces the risk of inconsistency when comparing results, like comparing apples with oranges, and hampers progress in the field. Standardised methods of analysis for insect matrices are essential to ensure uniformity, reliability, and comparability of data, fostering trust and efficiency within the scientific and industrial communities. Establishing standard methods is the responsibility of specialized institutions like the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists or the International Organization for Standardization. Thus, rather than prescribing standard methods, the focus of this chapter is on identifying challenges with the current state-of-the-art, emphasizing the need for consensus-based approaches, and helping researchers interpret differences between the various methods reported in the literature.

In the absence of standardised methods much can already be gained through provisional uniformization efforts. This chapter therefore outlines specific recommendations for sampling and key proximate analyses, including fat and fatty acid profiling, protein and amino acid quantification, ash determination, and the assessment of chitin, and nitrogen-free extract. Emphasis is also placed on the importance of accurate reporting, as documentation of methods will enhance data transparency, facilitate reproducibility, and strengthen cross-study comparisons. These efforts aim to streamline future research but also reduce inconsistencies in published data, ensuring the scientific community is no longer bugged by methodological uncertainties.
Schlüsselwörter:chemical analysis; chitin; insects; moisture; protein
1 Background and scope

The economic potential of insects has been a hot topic in research for the past few decades and for good reason. Their ability to effectively upcycle low-value, underutilised side streams, along with their feed conversion efficiency, low space, and water requirements, and — depending on the insect species — short life cycle, makes them ideal candidates for closing the loop and transitioning towards a circular bioeconomy.

The reason why insects have been deemed suitable as (1) meat alternatives; (2) sustainable animal feed ingredients; or (3) a renewable source of industrial biomass is their extraordinary chemical composition. It has been stated many times in the scientific literature that insects are excellent sources of fats and proteins, yet these analyses are generally based on approaches developed for sample matrices other than insect biomass. This is because, unfortunately, no standardised methods exist for insect matrices. Instead, researchers must resort to using non-standardised procedures or standard procedures for different matrices including animal feed and feeding stuffs (e.g., AOAC 930.15, AOCS Ba 6a-05, ISO 5983-1, 13903:2005), pet food (e.g., AOAC 984.13), meat and meat products (e.g., AOAC 981.10, AOAC 991.36), sludges and sludge products (e.g., DIN EN 15935:2009, DIN EN 12880:2000), among others. Consequently, a plethora of different analyses for macronutrients (e.g., moisture, fat, protein, etc.) exists in the scientific literature.

In the absence of standardised procedures for insect biomass, researchers perform those analyses that they deem best, often according to familiarity or convenience rather than clear scientific rationale. Unfortunately, this entails the risk of comparing apples with oranges when comparing new results with the existing literature. At this moment, researchers should therefore be vigilant for differences in analysis procedure when comparing results.
Table 1
Table 1

Insect-specific analytical challenges and related corrective actions

Citation: Journal of Insects as Food and Feed 2025; 10.1163/23524588-bja10238

    Download Figure
    Download figure as PowerPoint slide

Insect samples, however, pose specific challenges for chemical analysis (see Table 1). Establishing standardised methods that provide guidance and best practices for chemical analysis of insect biomass will be thus critical to ensure consistency and reliability of data related to insect composition. In this scope, the European Federation of Animal Science (EAAP) Commission on Insects has formed a working group on the standardisation of methods, parameters, and terminology in insect research. Proposing and establishing standardised methods is a task for specialised institutions such as the Association of Official Agricultural Chemists or the International Organization for Standardization. The aim of this chapter is therefore not to provide standardised methods for each chemical analysis of insect biomass, but instead to identify problems with the current state-of-the-art in the scientific literature, highlight the need for standard (or at least consensus) methods and to help researchers interpret differences between the various methods present in the literature. Nevertheless, recommendations will be given for key proximate analyses based on years of combined experience in this field. These recommendations for the analysis of moisture content, fat and fatty acids, protein and amino acids, ash, and chitin, as well as nitrogen-free extract can hopefully serve as general guidelines until official standard methods have been established. In addition, best practices in terms of reporting will be highlighted to enhance the interpretability and comparability of experimental data in the scientific literature.
2 Challenges and pitfalls in analysing the chemical composition of insect biomass
Sampling and storage

The chemical composition of insects is determined through the periodic sampling of continuous processes or the analysis of a specified number of small portions from a given lot. When conducted correctly, the results obtained from these samples provide an accurate estimation of the chemical composition of the entire population. Conversely, if the samples are not representative of the population, the analytical results will not accurately reflect their true chemical composition. It is therefore of the utmost importance to take samples using an appropriate methodology.

It is typical for an insect lot to be heterogeneous, meaning that the composition of the sample varies depending on the location. The use of adequate sampling plans and sample preparation can ensure that the sample is representative of the population, even in the case of insects. Grinding is a common method for homogenising insect samples; however, chemical changes may occur in the insect matrix during grinding. For instance, some insects discolour significantly when ground wet at room temperature (Janssen et al., 2017a).

Changes may also occur during preservation of samples prior to chemical analysis, and this can affect their chemical composition. Insects and related products may contain enzymes that degrade the food components to be analysed, even when stored at −20 °C (Wessels et al., 2020). Notably, several insect species are characterised by a high fat content and the presence of unsaturated lipids, which are highly susceptible to oxidation and degradation. Furthermore, insects contain microorganisms, which can alter the sample composition if not inactivated. In conclusion, it is therefore essential that the chemical analysis is preceded by careful preparation.
Chemical analyses

Moisture: From an analytical viewpoint, moisture analyses play a fundamental role because fat, protein and other constituents are usually reported on dry matter basis. Incorrectly determined moisture contents will therefore impact these reported values, obscuring research results and potentially leading to wrong conclusions. An overestimation of the moisture content will result in reported values on dry matter basis being lower than the actual content and vice versa. Even small errors compromise all subsequent proximate analyses, and the initial degree of inaccuracy is amplified on a percent basis as total content decreases. Suppose, for example, an insect sample having an actual moisture content of 60.0 g/100 g, an actual fat content of 15.0 g/100 g, and an actual protein content of 20.0 g/100 g. When expressed on a dry matter basis, these values are equivalent to 25.0 g fat/100 g dry matter (calculated as 15.0 g/100 g divided by 60.0 %) and 33.3 g protein/100 g dry matter. If the moisture content analysed in the laboratory is underestimated by 5 g/100 g — a plausible deviation due to improper drying conditions — the reported values on a dry matter basis would artificially increase. For instance, the reported fat content would increase to 27.3 g/100 g (calculated as 15.0/100 g divided by 55.0 %). This 9 % discrepancy from the true content might appear minor. However, such an error can have significant implications in research or industrial settings where accurate nutritional profiling is critical. Misestimations like this could lead to erroneous conclusions about the nutritional quality or composition of the sample, potentially affecting product labelling, consumer trust, or dietary studies.

Sample pretreatment for moisture analysis is relatively simple and typically requires some kind of particle size reduction (i.e., grinding, milling, cutting) to increase the surface area to promote evaporation. At the same time, the integrity of the insect cuticle or exoskeleton should be destroyed, as the cuticle hinders moisture evaporation. Optionally, sand can be added to reduce clumping for very moist samples.

Moisture analysis techniques described in the scientific literature on insects range from straightforward (e.g., drying the sample in a conventional oven), to moderately involved (e.g., vacuum oven, dedicated moisture analyser, or freeze drying), to advanced techniques like near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS). Oven drying in combination with differential weighing is by far the most prevalent method, but it comes with a wide range of drying times and temperatures. Temperatures range from 60 to 105 °C and drying times anywhere between 4 and 48 h, including ‘overnight’ and ‘until constant weight’ (Boulos et al., 2020; D’Hondt et al., 2020; El-Dakar et al., 2020; Janssen et al., 2017b; Kröncke and Benning, 2022; Pedrazzani et al., 2024; Smets et al., 2020; Verheyen et al., 2023). In some cases, researchers simply refer to specific AOAC or DIN methods or to AOAC in general, hereby leaving out crucial details. In others, insufficient details are provided to determine drying conditions (Fischer and Romano, 2021; Ochiai et al., 2024; Ravi et al., 2020; Triunfo et al., 2022). Finally, the use of forced-air ovens to reduce temperature gradients and promote evaporation is rarely reported.

Naturally, short drying times in combination with low drying temperature can result in an incomplete moisture removal and thus an underestimation of the moisture content. Although drying until constant weight can be adopted, prolonged heating at elevated temperatures may promote loss of other compounds including carbohydrates and proteins through Maillard and Strecker degradation. This will ultimately result in a too-large weight loss and thus an overestimation of the moisture content of the sample. Earlier work already demonstrated the formation of Maillard reaction and Strecker degradation products during drying of insect biomass at 65 °C (Khatun et al., 2021). A final side note on oven drying is that it is non-specific, meaning that all compounds with boiling points lower than or similar to water will evaporate during drying. Thus, while oven-drying is practical and economical, care should be taken to avoid insufficient or excessive drying of samples.

Freeze-drying may also be used to determine the moisture content of insects in combination with differential weighing (Liu et al., 2017; Spranghers et al., 2017). During freeze drying, water sublimates from the frozen sample and deposits on cold condenser plates under vacuum. The low air density is accompanied by a reduced heat transfer, resulting in slow sublimation rates and hence long drying times. In addition, the application of deep vacuum and cold condenser for typically long drying times (e.g., 48 h for ground Hermetia illucens) imposes a substantial cost for freeze drying. For these reasons, freeze drying can be considered less suitable for routine moisture analysis. Especially the last few percentages of moisture can prove difficult to remove, and may require prolonged (e.g., 4+ days) drying times depending on the sample matrix.

Relatively new in the field of moisture analysis of insects is NIRS, which has the advantage of being fast and non-destructive and may allow for greater automation (Kröncke and Benning, 2022). Still, as with all NIRS applications, thorough calibration and confirmation testing will have to be implemented, which must be performed using conventional techniques like oven drying.

Fat and fatty acids: In the literature, several approaches are described to extract and characterize insect fats. Regardless of the selected fat-extraction method, preprocessing steps are implemented which affect the yield and quality of the fats as well (Ojha et al., 2021). The killing of the insects has been reported to have a large influence on the quality of the fats. A heating step, such as blanching is recommended as it reduces enzyme activity that may result in oxidation processes and the generation of free fatty acids (Bernardo and Conte-Junior, 2024). Although fat-quality indices are important for downstream utilisation in food, feed, and industrial applications (Verheyen et al., 2023), they are beyond the scope of this section. A second commonly used preprocessing step is the removal of water by drying. Reducing the moisture content below 10 % facilitates easier fat extraction. Several options for drying are available (described later on in this article), but again this choice will impact the quality of the extracted fats (Bernardo and Conte-Junior, 2024; Kolobe et al., 2023;). After drying, insect biomass is typically ground to a fine powder to increase the surface area for the extraction process.

Fat extraction: While mechanical pressing using an oil screw press can be used to obtain fats from insect biomass, its lower yield compared to solvent extraction methods makes it not suitable for analytical purposes (Matthäus et al., 2019). The same is true for aqueous-based fat extraction, which also results in low fat yields (Tzompa-Sosa et al., 2014). Conventional techniques resulting in better fat yields make use of organic solvent extractions like the Folch, Bligh and Dyer methods, or adaptations thereof (Saini et al., 2021). As the base methods use toxic chloroform/methanol solvent combinations, adaptations typically make use of alternative solvents like hexane, petroleum ether, or more recently green solvents such as 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MeTHF) or ethyl acetate (Smets et al., 2021b; Verheyen et al., 2023). The polarity of the selected extraction solvent can have a significant impact on the yield and composition of the resulting extracted fat-fraction, with 2-MeTHF effectively able to extract more phospholipids than hexane.

To improve extraction efficiency (e.g., by increasing yield or reducing extraction time), several options are available. For example, acid hydrolysis of the biomass prior to fat extraction (i.e., the Mojonnier or Schmid-Bondzynski-Ratzlaff principle) may increase lipid yield by breaking down lipid-protein complexes. Although not actively studied for insect biomass, incorporating such acid digestion step will likely increase the yield considering the high-protein and high-fat insect matrix (Pérez-Palacios et al., 2008).

Increasing the number of extraction cycles also increases lipid yield. In this scope, the Soxhlet method is by far the most widely adopted procedure, typically making use of petroleum ether or hexane as extraction solvent. Nevertheless, the use of other, green solvents like 2-MeTHF or ethyl acetate has been reported for insect biomass as well. In this procedure, the dried sample is repeatedly extracted by the solvent, up to 10-12 extraction cycles/hour for a prolonged duration. However, the extracted oil is continuously heated, which can lead to lipid oxidation and degradation of heat-labile compounds. In their study, Verheyen et al. (2023) observed similar yields of mealworm oil using Soxhlet extraction with hexane or ethyl acetate as the solvent. Using a maceration extraction procedure with hexane or ethyl acetate, oil yields were about 7 % lower than samples extracted by Soxhlet (Verheyen et al., 2023). In contrast, Smets et al. (2021b) reported oil yields from a wet extraction procedure comparable to Soxhlet, both with 2-MeTHF, hereby avoiding initial drying of the insect biomass. This clearly highlights the importance of reporting the details of fat extraction, as different extraction protocols and different extraction solvents potentially produce different results.

After the extraction procedure, solvent is removed by evaporation and the remaining fat is usually centrifuged or filtered to remove any solid residues and particulate matter that may be present. The fat may be placed at an elevated temperature to remove residual traces of solvent before the yield is determined gravimetrically.

Fatty-acid analysis: The composition of the lipid fraction and the fatty acid profile are the main analytical characteristics of insect fats. The fatty acid profile is determined by derivatizing the free fatty acids to increase their volatility. Most of the time, fatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) are generated via (trans)esterification with methanol catalysed by BF3 (Smets et al., 2021b), requiring mild reaction conditions (e.g., 50-60 °C, 1 h). Although the exact derivatization and GC(-MS) analysis conditions vary between authors, the impact of fat extraction on the fatty acid composition is considered much greater. Other derivatization methods like silylation of fatty acids with N,O-bis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) have been reported as well (Navarro del Hierro et al., 2020). Following derivatization, the FAMEs are analysed with GC-FID or GC-MS using commercially available FAME standards and internal standards for quantification (Smets et al., 2021b).

Although seldom performed in the insect literature, other possible characterization steps of insect fats include quantification of the different components: mono-, di- and triacyl contents, phospholipids, free fatty acids, fat-soluble vitamins, and minor compounds. Smets et al. (2021b) analysed the lipid class composition with high-performance thin-layer chromatography, making use of analytical standards for different lipid classes, scanning densitometry, and processing with suitable software. Although different extraction conditions resulted in different extraction yields and lipid class compositions, the fatty acid profile remained largely unaffected by the extraction procedure (Smets et al., 2021b).

Protein and amino acids: The highest-profile methodological controversy around insects is undoubtedly protein analysis. The aptly named commentary article ‘The high level of protein content reported in insects for food and feed is overestimated’ by Jonas-Levi and Martinez described in 2017 highlights discrepancies regarding protein analyses reported in the literature (Jonas-Levi and Martinez, 2017). Sadly, many of the same problems persist to this day due to the absence of standardised or official analysis procedures.

Roughly speaking, two different types of protein analysis can be identified. The first is indirect determination consisting of a nitrogen analysis and subsequent calculation with a so-called nitrogen-to-protein (NtP, kP, etc.) conversion factor. The second type of analyses are direct determinations as they measure proteins or amino acids as such. These two types therefore differ substantially and come with their own advantages, disadvantages, and words of caution. Due to their fundamental aspects, indirect determinations cannot be considered accurate, and they can only aim to provide a best possible estimate of the protein content.

Indirect protein analysis: The Kjeldahl and Dumas method are two examples of regularly reported indirect protein analyses for edible insects (Ritvanen et al., 2020; Smets et al., 2021c). Other indirect, colorimetric methods like Bradford and Lowry also exist, but as these are only suitable for the determination of soluble proteins and not for total protein analyses, these methods will not be discussed in this chapter. In brief, the Kjeldahl method consists of an acid digestion during which organic nitrogen is converted into NH4+. Destruction temperature and duration, however, differ across insect studies with reported values anywhere between 380-420 °C and 1.5-3 h. Heterocyclic, nitrogenous compounds (e.g., nucleotides, nucleic acids) as well as compounds with N-N or N-O linkages are, however, highly resistant to the digestion and are therefore not (completely) converted without proper (reductive) pretreatment. Through titrimetry or another analytical step, NH4+ is then quantified and the organic nitrogen content of the sample is calculated (Sáez-Plaza et al., 2013). In contrast, the Dumas method is a combustion type analysis. In brief, all N-containing compounds are combusted at high temperatures in the presence of catalysts, resulting in the formation of NOx. Subsequent reduction of NOx to N2, followed by chromatographic separation of the combustion gases results in the total nitrogen content of the sample, which includes both organic and inorganic nitrogen (e.g., nitrate, nitrite). Despite fundamental differences in the obtained result of the Kjeldahl and Dumas method (i.e., different nitrogen fractions), these results have been used interchangeably and compared across studies on edible insect for several decades (Jonas-Levi and Martinez, 2017; Smets et al., 2021c).

After determination of nitrogen content, either through the Kjeldahl or Dumas method, a conversion factor (NtP or kP) is used to calculate the protein content. Traditionally, the ‘crude protein content’ has been calculated using 6.25 as conversion factor. However, despite being officially recognised by the European food legislation (reg. 1169/2011), this value assumes that (1) all nitrogen originates from proteins and (2) the average nitrogen content of said proteins is equal to 16 g/100 g protein (Mariotti et al., 2008). Over time, specific conversion factors have been established for different sample matrices as it became apparent that these assumptions do not always hold true (Jones, 1941). This is particularly relevant for the insect matrix as it contains other nitrogenous organic compounds including chitin and melanin, among others. Chitin contains roughly 7 % nitrogen and the chitin content of edible insects varies between 2-20 % depending on insect species and life stage (Abidin et al., 2020; Soetemans et al., 2020); a considerable amount of non-protein nitrogen can therefore potentially be attributed to chitin. A recent study demonstrated that 4-7 % of total nitrogen could be attributed to chitin but also found that non-chitin nitrogenous compounds were responsible for a larger fraction of the non-protein nitrogen (Smets et al., 2021c).

Over the years, several researchers have in fact calculated more appropriate conversion factors for different insects species: Hermetia illucens (4.32, 4.43, 4.67, 5.75), Tenebrio molitor (4.75, 5.41), Alphitobius diaperinus (4.86), Acheta domesticus (4.62, 5.25), Locusta migratoria (4.86, 5.33), Bombyx mori (5.24), Gryllus bimaculatus (4.94), Gryllus assimilis (5.57) (Boulos et al., 2020; Janssen et al., 2017b; Ochiai et al., 2024; Ravi et al., 2020; Smets et al., 2021c). Noteworthy are the different kP values reported for the same insect species. This discrepancy likely originates from some researchers considering chitin, whereas others only consider extracted protein in their calculation. In addition, the use of anhydrous amino acid residues (i.e., through subtraction of the molecular mass of H2O) is not always consistent in these calculations, contributing to the observed discrepancies. An additional consideration is that almost all the studies cited above bear the same shortcoming: these values are calculated based on one insect sample per species. A more holistic approach, using different instars and (if relevant) feeding substrates like the study on black soldier fly larvae (Smets et al., 2021c), can give more insight into the variation of this kP factor within insect species, which is a necessary prerequisite for establishing a general ‘insect kP factor’.

Amino-acid analysis: The primary advantages of indirect protein determination methods are their ease of use, relatively short analysis times and low investment cost. Even with establishment of improved conversion factors, however, indirect methods will remain inaccurate estimates of protein content. More accurate results can be obtained through direct protein determinations, such as amino acid analysis, but this approach requires careful consideration regarding sample preparation and may entail significant cost. The high fat content of the insect matrix is sometimes overlooked during sample preparation. In addition to complicating protein extraction and hydrolysis (Choi et al., 2017), it also poses challenges in liquid handling and instrumentation. For example, fats tend to adhere to the surface of glass or plastic pipettes, leading to sample loss, contamination, and inconsistent sample volumes compromising precision and accuracy. Additionally, lipid contamination in chromatographic systems can cause backpressure issues, reducing instrument performance, and increasing both operational and maintenance costs.

During amino-acid analysis, proteins are first hydrolysed into the individual amino acids under acidic conditions, and under alkaline conditions for tryptophan as the latter is decomposed completely under acidic conditions. A prior oxidation with performic acid can be performed to oxidise cysteine and methionine into their more stable forms cysteic acid and methionine sulfone, respectively. It is also worth noting that glutamine and asparagine undergo deamidation during the hydrolysis. As a result, the measured glutamic acid content represents the sum of glutamine and glutamic acid in the original sample, and similarly, the aspartic acid content reflects the sum of asparagine and aspartic acid. Upon completion of hydrolysis, individual amino acids are separated by liquid chromatography. This is typically through ion exchange chromatography, but conventional reversed phase chromatography with pre- or post-column derivatisation is described in the literature as well. The protein content can then be calculated as the sum of the individual amino acid residues.

It is partially due to these challenges that protocols listed in the scientific literature vary from source to source. Typically, 6 M HCl and 4 M LiOH are used for the acidic and alkaline hydrolysis, respectively but the use of other strong bases like NaOH or Ba(OH)2 in place of the latter has been reported as well (Ochiai et al., 2024; Purschke et al., 2018). Several publications mention the addition of a protecting agent like phenol or 2-mercaptoethanol to the 6 M HCl to preserve tyrosine and methionine (Boulos et al., 2020). Others describe hydrolysis under inert atmosphere or vacuum (Ochiai et al., 2024; Ritvanen et al., 2020; Smets et al., 2021c). The hydrolysis time is generally kept at 22 h to ensure efficient peptide bond cleavage while minimizing the reduction in amino acid content due to degradation.

These differences in sample preparation (e.g., addition of phenol, vacuum, pre-oxidation, etc.) likely impose a substantial impact on the amino acid contents reported in the literature. As shown in an earlier inter-laboratory study, where the same three insect samples were analysed in different laboratories, significant differences were observed (Oonincx et al., 2019). A final consideration for amino acid analyses is how to present the data. More specifically, simply taking the sum of the individual amino acids as such presents an overestimation of the actual protein content. Alternatively, using the anhydrous amino acid residues (i.e., through subtraction of the molecular mass of H2O) may present a more accurate value for the protein content of the sample as one water molecule is expelled during peptide bond formation (Boulos et al., 2020; Tkachuk, 1969). Calculations with literature data reveal that reporting the sum of all amino acid residues gives a protein content roughly 17 % higher compared to using anhydrous amino acid residues (Fischer and Romano, 2021; Janssen et al., 2017b; Ravi et al., 2020; Smets et al., 2020; Spranghers et al., 2017).

Ash: Crude ash reflects the inorganic material present in the insects, i.e. the macro- and micromineral composition, including the possible presence of heavy metals. The crude ash composition of 236 edible insect species has been reported by Rumpold and Schlüter (2013). It is generally a smaller fraction than lipids and proteins and can be as low as 3 % on dry matter basis. Although, some species or life stages have a reported ash content exceeding 20 % (Rumpold and Schlüter, 2013).

Determination of the crude ash content of a sample is typically conducted through incineration in a muffle furnace at high temperature. It is a gravimetric analysis, in which the sample weight after the ashing procedure is compared to the initial weight of the sample. Within this furnace, the sample is oxidised by the oxygen present in the air. Organic matter is removed as CO2, NOx, H2O, etc. leaving behind all inorganic material consisting of metal oxides, non-volatile phosphates, and silicates, among others. Critical process parameters are the incineration temperature and the duration of the dry ashing procedure. Especially the incineration temperature is important given that a temperature too low can cause incomplete ashing, while excessively high temperatures may cause the volatilisation of certain elements (e.g., potassium as K2O). For this reason, dry ashing temperatures generally range between 450 and 600 °C, with 550 °C being the most common. Ashing duration, however, is shown to vary between publications, with 0.5 h being the shortest and ‘until constant weight’ being the longest (Fombong et al., 2017; Liu et al., 2017; Pedrazzani et al., 2024; Spranghers et al., 2017). Evidently, excessively short ashing durations will result in incomplete ashing and overestimation of the ash content. A visual check of the resulting ash can already give some idea: pure ash should have an off-white to grey appearance. Black discolouration may therefore suggest incomplete ashing. More recently, hybrid microwave muffle furnaces are on the rise as well, allowing for much faster analyses.

Chitin: Chitin, or poly-(N-acetyl-1,4-β-d-glucopyranosamine), is a β-1,4 polymer consisting of N-acetyl-d-glucosamine and, to a lesser extent, d-glucosamine units. Chitin is an insoluble carbohydrate that is considered indigestible and has some similarity to plant fibres such as cellulose. Because of this similarity, gravimetric fibre analyses originally developed for the analysis of plant material have often been applied to insect biomass to estimate the chitin content and are still in practice today.

One of these methods entails the detergent fibre (DF) analysis. In the original DF protocol, the investigated material is heated (90 °C, 5 min) in a neutral reagent to which a heat-stable α-amylase is added (Van Soest et al., 1991). Following the digestion, the remaining material, which represents the neutral detergent fibre (NDF), is then weighted and further heated (90 °C, 10 min) in an acid detergent solution containing trimethylammonium bromate dissolved in sulphuric acid (ISO 13906:2008). The acid detergent fibre (ADF) content is then gravimetrically determined after drying overnight at 103 °C. Finally, the acid detergent lignin (ADL) is determined by further digestion (20 °C, 3 h) of the ADF with cold (15 °C) H2SO4 and drying at 103 °C overnight followed by ignition at 525 °C for 3 h (ISO 13906:2008).

Subtracting ADF from NDF gives the hemicellulose content, the difference between ADF and ADL gives the cellulose content, while ADL represents the lignin fraction of the sample analysed (Peguero et al., 2023). However, such a classification does not make sense for insects, where the main fibrous component is chitin, as they do not contain cellulose or lignin except for possible traces found in the gut. Nonetheless, the difference between ADF and ADL has been used by several researchers to estimate the chitin content of the sample. (Hahn et al., 2018; Triunfo et al., 2022). This reasoning is based on the structural similarity between cellulose and chitin, and the ADL fraction representing catechol-like compounds. An alternative approach is correcting the ADF value for the protein content (i.e., amino acid content, cf. section 2.2.3) of the sample (Finke, 2007). These approaches, however, do not consider the presence of cellulose in the digestive tract, indicating possible overestimation of the result depending on the diet and life stage of the insect.

Among others, Liu et al. (2012), Smets et al. (2020) and Woods et al. (2020) adapted a method for extracting chitin from crustaceans to isolate and purify chitin from insects. This process includes a demineralisation step (i.e., removing minerals by means of a strong acid), a deproteinisation step (i.e., removing proteins with a hot alkaline solution) and a decolourisation step (i.e., removing pigments using sodium hypochlorite or hydrogen peroxide) (Hahn et al., 2020). A defatting step can be applied to the initially dried insect meal with the aim of removing potential contaminants and increasing the final extraction yield (Espinosa-Solis et al., 2024). By applying this sequence of steps, a crystalline polymer is obtained. This product is commonly reported as chitin, although several studies suggest that it contains several compounds (e.g., cellulose) rather than only chitin (Mohan et al., 2020).

More specific methods for chitin analysis of edible insects include spectrometric and chromatographic techniques. Spectrometric methods are based on the quantification of acetyl groups (Hahn et al., 2018) and/or d-glucosamine and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine (Psarianos et al., 2022) generated from chitin hydrolysis. In such methods, chitin is typically extracted and purified from the dried, milled, and defatted material by applying the same sequence of steps described above (demineralization, deproteinization and decolouration), before complete hydrolysis is performed under acidic conditions. During hydrolysis, chitin is depolymerised into N-acetyl-d-glucosamine monomers and converted into acetic acid and D-glucosamine (Nurfikari and de Boer, 2021). Acetate can then be spectroscopically measured at 450 nm (Hahn et al., 2018), while d-glucosamine is measured at 650 nm (Farnesi et al., 2012). Although these methods showed acceptable consistency and high reproducibility, different degrees of hydrolysis of the extracted chitin might hamper the results, resulting in underestimation of the real chitin content. Hydrolysis is indeed a stepwise process that can take several hours and is influenced by several conditions (e.g., chitin crystallinity, temperature, and acid concentration) that can greatly affect the result (Hahn et al., 2018; Kvasnicka et al., 2023). Additionally, acetate might originate from non-chitinous material, suggesting low specificity when only acetate determination is applied (D’Hondt et al., 2020).

Different chromatographic methods reported in the literature for chitin determinations include Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) (D’Hondt et al., 2020), Liquid Chromatography-Electrochemical detection (LC-ECD) (Nurfikari and de Boer, 2021), Liquid Chromatography-Fluorescence detection (LC-FLR) (Han and Heinonen, 2021) and Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography-Electrospray Ionization tandem Mass Spectrometry (UPLC-ESI/MS) (Luparelli et al., 2023). For these methods, chitin is also depolymerised and deacetylated into d-glucosamine, either with or without prior extraction/purification from insect biomass. Pre-column derivatization might be needed when conventional reversed-phase liquid chromatography is applied. For example, d-glucosamine derivatization with fluorenylmethyloxycarbonil-succinimide (FMOC-Su) was carried out by Han and Heinonen (2021) who measured the chitin content of Acheta domesticus and Tenebrio molitor with a UPLC equipped by a fluorescence detector. d-Glucosamine derivatization was also required when the UPLC-ECI/MS chromatographic system was applied (Luparelli et al., 2023). In this method, chitin hydrolysis was carried out directly on the whole insect flour, without the need for isolation and purification. d-Glucosamine derivatization was performed with an AccQ-Fluor reagent kit. The main problems of pre-column derivatization concern incomplete derivatization and the potential reaction between the derivatizing reagent and compounds other than D-glucosamine (Han and Heinonen, 2021). In both cases, misinterpretation of the results can be expected.

Chromatographic methods that do not include pre-column derivatization include LC-MS and LC-ECD. LC-MS was applied by D’Hondt et al. (2020) for determining the chitin content in Hermetia illucens larvae. According to this method, whole larval flour was hydrolysed with 6 N HCl and the supernatant of the hydrolysed solution was injected into a HPLC device equipped with a refractive index detector (RID) for acetate determination and into a UPLC device equipped with a quadruple MS for d-glucosamine and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine quantification. LC-ECD was applied by Nurfikari and de Boer (2021) for measuring the chitin content in black soldier fly exuviae, mealworms and crickets. In this last method, isolated and purified chitin was hydrolysed and directly injected into a HPLC equipped with an UV-VIS detector or with an ECD detector for quantifying acetate and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine, respectively. Total chitin content was then estimated by summing the content of the three detected compounds.

A further method recently introduced for edible insects includes an electrophoretic method (Kvasnicka et al., 2023). In this method, whole insects were lyophilized and milled into a powder, which was then hydrolysed with 6 M H2SO4 for 6 hours at 110 °C. Generated d-glucosamine was then diluted with a mixture of 10 mM sodium acetate, 10 mM acetic acid and 0.05 % hydroxyethyl-cellulose (pH 4.7) and detected by a conductometer coupled with a capillary zone electrophoresis instrument (Kvasnicka et al., 2023). This method employs the ability of d-glucosamine to be protonated up to pH 10 (behaving as a cation within a wide pH range), and appears to be simple, selective, and sensitive, without requiring long preparation steps. However, the presence of basic amino acids, which exhibit an electrophoretic mobility similar to d-glucosamine, could lead to misinterpretation of the results, meaning that isolation and purification of the chitin-containing fraction should always be performed prior to quantification.
Nitrogen-free extract: In food and feed chemistry, the term nitrogen-free extract (NFE) is typically and largely used for indicating the overall amount of water-soluble non-structural carbohydrates (i.e. non-fibrous carbohydrates) contained within the studied matrix (Danieli et al., 2019). It is typically determined by subtracting the sum of moisture (water), ether extract (fat), crude protein, crude fibre, and ash from the original sample weight (Banjo et al., 2006). However, as crude fibre might not correctly approximate the effective amount of structural carbohydrates, the use of NDF should be preferred (Choi et al., 2020; Detmann and Valadares, 2010). Assuming that each nutrient is expressed as mass fraction (w, (g/100 g)) on dry matter, NFE can be calculated by applying the following equation:
wNFE=100−(wproteins+wlipids+wash+wfibre)

In some cases (Finke, 2013), ADF rather than NDF has been used. While the use of ADF might be justified as it represents the real amount of indigestible material (i.e., chitin and catechol-like compounds), NDF should always be preferred as it provides a better indication of the total structural carbohydrate content of the analysed sample. However, regardless of the specific fibre fraction used in the calculations, it is apparent from these formulas that NFE determined in this way strictly depends on the other parameters. This means that any error during analytical determination of the other substances will cause NFE to be misinterpreted.

Alternative analytical methods have also been developed for directly measuring the soluble carbohydrates in food, feed, or other materials. Although many methods are available, only a few of them have been effectively applied on edible insects. To be suitable for measuring non-structural carbohydrates in insects, methods should be able to discern between non-fibrous carbohydrates and chitin. Although chitin is chemically a carbohydrate, it should not be considered as such from a nutritional point of view as it is considered mainly undigestible.

In general, these methods for carbohydrate determination consist of hydrolysis of polysaccharides resulting in production of simple sugars that can then be quantified through colorimetry or chromatography. The most common colorimetric method for carbohydrate quantification in edible insects is the anthrone method (Van Handel, 1985). This approach is based on the condensation of pre-dehydrated sugars with a reagent containing anthrone dissolved in concentrated sulphuric acid. The green-blueish solution generated through the reaction can then be spectroscopically measured at 630 nm, and the concentration of non-fibrous carbohydrates is determined against a glucose-based calibration curve (Bonysana et al., 2024; Sarmah et al., 2022; Sheileja et al., 2023). Although this method is simple and fast, it may be error-prone due to the presence of chitin and/or sugar-alcohols that may have different reaction kinetics with the anthrone reagent (Lee, 2019; Van Handel, 1985). Another serious problem is the use of glucose as standard; different sugars react differently with the anthrone reagent, giving rise to variable colour intensities (Body et al., 2018).

An alternative is the phenol-sulphuric acid method as described by Son et al. (2021). This colorimetric methodology, introduced for the first time by Dubois et al. (1956), is based on the condensation of carbohydrates (pre-hydrolysed using H2SO4) with phenols. The reaction will generate orange-yellow complexes that can be spectroscopically measured at 470 nm. Although this method appears highly specific and should not be subject to the problems associated with the anthrone method, it may still present limitations. Specifically, the absence of linearity at very low and very high concentrations and/or the high sensitivity toward inorganic interferences (Le and Stuckey, 2016). Finally, the different reactivity of various sugars should still be considered.

Chromatographic methods for carbohydrate analysis, through either liquid chromatography (LC) with or without derivatisation or gas chromatography (GC) after silylation, offer significant advantages over colorimetric methods (Huber and BeMiller, 2024). Regarding sample preparation, carbohydrates are extracted from defatted crushed samples through alcoholic solutions, followed by centrifugation and/or filtration. Further clarification may be applied on the extracted carbohydrate solution, aimed at removal of impurities (Sanz and Matinez-Castro, 2007). Determination is then carried out by HPLC coupled with conductivity, pulsed amperometric, refractive index or evaporative light scattering detectors or by GC with photoionization or mass detectors (Pereira da Costa and Conte-Junior, 2015). Among the main advantages of these methodologies, over the traditional colorimetric methods, is the possibility of accurate measurement of the effective amount of carbohydrates in sample without the need to account for interference, which is typical of complexes mixtures. However, despite the apparent utility of these methods they have thus far hardly been applied for the analysis of insect biomass.
Reporting

In addition to the discrepancies in choice of analysis procedure, accurate information on how selected procedures were applied is also commonly lacking in the scientific literature on insects. This not only complicates the interpretation of experimental data, but it also impedes the comparison of results between studies and the adoption of protocols for repeat experiments. Some examples of this include but are not limited to: (1) not reporting temperature at which insect samples were dried to determine moisture content; (2) neglecting to mention Soxhlet extraction cycles; (3) not reporting the choice of extraction solvent; (4) leaving out the duration of a dry ashing procedure; (5) not mentioning instrumental parameters (e.g., GC, LC); and (6) not reporting the nitrogen-to-protein (NtP, kP, etc) conversion factor, etc. Without this basic information, readers may struggle to interpret reported results, let alone reproduce them.
Figure 1
Figure 1

Flowchart illustrating a recommended workflow for chemical analysis of insect biomass.

Citation: Journal of Insects as Food and Feed 2025; 10.1163/23524588-bja10238

    Download Figure
    Download figure as PowerPoint slide

Related, and likely contributing, to these discrepancies between studies is the inconsistent use of standardised terminology. Researchers frequently resort to descriptive text or incorrect symbols to describe insect analyses, despite the existence of established symbols and abbreviations coupled with correct subscripts. While this is likely aimed at improving clarity for the non-specialist reader, it also hinders uniformity and makes the overall body of literature harder to interpret and compare. For example, the terms ‘nitrogen total’, ‘total nitrogen’, ‘Nt’, or ‘nitrogen w/w%’ found in the literature likely all refer to the same mass fraction (w) of nitrogen either on dry or wet matter basis. In this regard, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) has established a nomenclature specifically for this purpose (Cohen et al., 2007). While it is already employed frequently in the domain of insect nutritional analysis, it will be essential for all researchers to adopt these guidelines when transitioning towards standardised methods of analysis.
3 Recommendations for the sector
Introduction

The variety of different analyses of insect biomass reported in the literature can leave researchers wondering which analysis to choose and implement in their laboratory. Even answering seemingly basic questions — like “what is the typical chitin content of mealworm larvae?” — can be difficult, with different protocols providing markedly different results and no obvious way to distinguish between them. The establishment of official standard methods, providing guidance and best practices in terms of sampling, protocol, and reporting, through specialised institutions or associations like AOAC or ISO is therefore critical. Although achieving this end goal is beyond the scope of this chapter, the following sections will provide recommendations for the sector regarding several key proximate analyses. A flowchart illustrating a recommended workflow for the different chemical analyses is shown in Figure 1. These recommendations can serve as general guidelines for planning/execution of experiments and interpretation of previously published reports until official standard methods have been developed and implemented.
Sampling and storage

In this context, the overarching objective of sampling is to estimate the average chemical composition of insects and insect-based products. For heterogenous samples (e.g. a target population of whole insects), this is typically achieved through random subsampling. Although this method appears straightforward, the collection of a truly random sample is challenging. Haphazard sampling, which involves the selection of samples without a defined plan, is not random and may reflect the analyst’s unintentional biases and/or non-random distribution of individuals. To improve the acquisition of truly random samples, a straightforward methodology can be utilised. Initially, the target population is partitioned into equal units, with each unit assigned a distinctive number. Subsequently, a random number table is employed to select the units for sampling (Harvey, 2021).

To minimise sampling error, it is also essential that the sample size is appropriate. A sample that is too small may exhibit a significant discrepancy in composition when compared to the target population. Samples that are too large require a greater investment of time and resources to collect and analyse, without a substantial improvement of the sampling error (Harvey, 2021). For a full chemical analysis of fresh and dried insects, comprising moisture, fat, protein, chitin, ash, amino acid, fatty acid and mineral content, a composite sample size of 180 g is recommended if three technical replicates are required and 300 g for five replicates.

Immediately after harvesting live insects, it is advisable to perform a heat step to minimise enzymatic processes and microbial spoilage: a blanching step of 1 min at 100 °C, followed by cooling and draining, is typically sufficient (Vandeweyer, 2017). Due to the heterogeneous nature of an insect population, homogenisation is necessary. Because wet mixing can lead to matrix changes, it is preferable to dry grind the insects. For efficient drying, however, the integrity of the insect cuticle should be destroyed. For this reason, a swift cryogenic crude grinding step, preserving the cold chain, can be employed.

Further grinding of dry samples produces a homogenised sample containing only small particles (<1 mm). This step increases the accuracy and reduces the uncertainty of the measurement. It should be noted that it is important to avoid heating and, due to their high fat content, smearing of the sample during the grinding process. As insects typically have a high fat content but also potentially hard exoskeletons, a cutting or knife mill is the preferred option.

It is recommended that samples be stored in airtight containers or plastic bags at −20 °C both before and after homogenisation. This will delay and minimise fat oxidation, enzymatic changes, and microbial spillage.
Chemical analyses

Moisture: Incorrect moisture determination will unintentionally influence the chemical composition of the whole biomass, especially if the results are reported on dry matter basis. The multitude of combinations of time, temperature, and instruments for moisture analyses described in the literature makes it difficult to recommend one standard procedure. As mentioned above, high temperatures and long drying times can promote Maillard and Strecker reactions, leading to the formation (and loss) of volatile compounds and thus an overestimation of the initial moisture content. On the other hand, low temperatures or short drying times may result in incomplete drying of the sample, leading to an underestimation. The latter is especially true for freeze drying (lyophilisation) as removing the last few percentages of moisture can take up to several days. For this reason, it is our belief that more research on this topic is required before an unambiguous answer can be given and a general moisture analysis can be recommended.

At this moment, however, freeze drying for up to several days, likely provides the most unambiguously accurate estimate of the moisture content of the insect sample. However, these lengthy drying procedures will drastically hinder implementation in high-throughput commercial laboratories and the higher cost could pose a substantial hurdle for several stakeholders or research groups within the insect sector. Oven drying can be used, but temperature and duration should be optimized for each sample type in preliminary experiments and clearly reported in subsequent communication. Regardless of the drying process, the sample should always first undergo a size reduction, like grinding or milling. This reduces the particle size, promoting moisture evaporation, and also ensures disruption of the exoskeleton. An intact exoskeleton will hinder the drying process considering one of its primary functions in insects is to prevent moisture loss.

Fat and fatty acids: Sample pretreatment prior to fat analysis should be considered and clearly reported. A heating step (e.g., blanching) should be incorporated to minimize enzymatic browning processes and eliminate the action of lipases. For whole insects, the conditions under which the killing step is performed should be described in detail. As mentioned earlier, the drying process can also profoundly affect resulting fat characteristics, like quality, composition, and yield (Fombong etal., 2021; Kolobe et al., 2023).

Insects should always be ground before the extraction procedure to promote fat extraction. Details of the grinding (e.g., particle size for powders) and the extraction procedure should be provided. When only the total fat content of the biomass is desired, Soxhlet extraction is preferred due to the high number of extraction cycles resulting in more complete extraction. The usefulness of incorporating an acid digestion step, however, remains to be investigated. Due to Soxhlet’s longer duration at elevated temperature, however, the resulting fats are no longer suitable for fatty acid analysis nor for assessing quality. For these latter analyses, protocols like the Folch or Bligh and Dyer methods at room temperature are preferable. The conditions under which the solvent is removed from the fats and the conditions at which the fat is stored should also be reported, especially for fat quality analyses.

Regarding the determination of the fatty acid profile, GC-FID or GC-MS is the preferred method after (trans)esterification to FAME with methanol catalysed by BF3 (Smets et al., 2021b), requiring mild reaction conditions (e.g., 50-60 °C, 1 h). Commercial FAME standards are available for GC analyses. The utilisation of internal standards (e.g., methyl tricosanoate) is strongly recommended to ensure the accuracy and precision of the results.

Protein and amino acids: As mentioned earlier, the choice for indirect or direct protein determinations depends on a variety of factors as each option comes with advantages and disadvantages. The only protein analysis that measures both soluble and insoluble proteins and directly reflects actual protein content of the sample is amino acid analysis. However, careful consideration of sample preparation, especially the hydrolysis step, is critical as this significantly impacts the result of the subsequent chromatographic analysis. Specifically for insect biomass, which has a high fat content, it is advisable to incorporate a defatting step prior to the amino acid analysis, to prevent any issues related to liquid handling and instrumentation. In this scope, the defatted sample from the Soxhlet extraction can be used once all residual solvent is evaporated.

Preferably, prior oxidation with performic acid as described earlier should be performed for the quantification of cysteine and methionine as cysteic acid and methionine sulfone, respectively. This is especially true for analyses aimed at improving nutritional databases. An additional hydrolysis under basic conditions (i.e., 4 M LiOH) should always be performed to determine the tryptophan content, considering this is an essential amino acid for both humans and farmed animals. A third and final hydrolysis with 6 M HCl should be performed for the remaining amino acids. Finally, when using amino acid analysis to determine the total protein content, it is advisable to calculate using anhydrous amino acid residues instead of the measured (individual) amino acids.

Due to the associated cost of equipment and consumables required for amino acid analyses, these methods are not readily available to all laboratories and may not be feasible for all applications. In their place, indirect protein determinations can also be an effective tool for estimation of insect protein content. Indirect protein determinations like Kjeldahl have the advantages of being easy to implement and relatively low cost. For this reason, Kjeldahl is acknowledged as a standard method for all types of food/feed matrices, and it is also legally recognised as the reference method for protein estimation in food products — for example in nutritional labelling. Increasing sample throughput is possible through combustion analyses like Dumas. While studies have shown a matrix dependency for both methods (Simonne et al., 1997), this comparison has only recently been studied for the insect matrix (Smets et al., 2021c). Interestingly, it was found that Kjeldahl and Dumas could be used interchangeably for the black soldier fly (Hermetia illucens) (Smets et al., 2021c). Still, this should be confirmed for other insect species as well, especially those fed on nitrate-rich leguminous diets.

Regardless of whether Kjeldahl or Dumas are used for indirect protein analyses of edible insects, accurate conversion factors which consider the nitrogen content of insect protein, and the presence of other non-protein nitrogen sources are critical. Failure to use appropriate conversion factors will result in an incorrect estimate of the protein content. Black soldier fly is again the most studied insect species in this regard, with one such investigation (Smets et al., 2021c) arriving at a kP value of 4.43 ± 0.22. Given potential differences in non-protein nitrogen content, more research is needed to validate conversion factors for other insect species.

Ash: Necessary sample pretreatment for ash determination entails drying and grinding of the sample to a fine and homogeneous powder to increase its surface area. Care must also be taken to avoid contamination of the sample by other mineral sources in the environment (e.g. dust). By introducing sample blanks, sources of contamination may be identified.

The ashed sample is then weighted in a crucible which, depending on the application, can be composed of different materials. Typically, porcelain crucibles are used for their relatively good stability and for economic reasons. For high-fat samples, like certain insect species, it is preferred to incorporate a prior charring step over a Bunsen burner. Doing so avoids the potential fire hazard when high-fat samples are placed directly in the muffle furnace. Typically, the muffle furnace is set at 550 °C to avoid volatilisation of certain elements while still promoting swift ashing. Regarding duration, dry ashing should only be considered complete when the weight of the remaining ashes is stable. When ashing to constant weight, the samples should be placed inside a desiccator upon removal from the furnace and allowed to cool to room temperature before their weight is taken. This step is required to prevent moisture uptake from the environment which can also lead to overestimation of the ash content.

Chitin: Based on the considerations reported above, the recommended method for quantifying the chitin content of insect biomass is through chromatography, followed by spectrometry. While these methods should always be preferred to gravimetric methods, they require specific instruments that may not be available or practical for all settings. Gravimetric methods, employing ADF determinations, should be regarded as a last option and employed solely when more specific techniques are unavailable or inapplicable, considering they lack specificity and are unable to differentiate chitin from other fibres like cellulose. In such cases, the combination of ADF determinations with additional correction for amino acid content (i.e., ADF-AA) or ADL (i.e., ADF-ADL) will improve the approximation of the chitin content.

The main reason why chromatographic methods should be preferred is that the insect biomass can be analysed as such, hereby avoiding sources of error associated with pretreatment steps like chitin extraction and purification (Han and Heinonen, 2021). In addition, they are more specific, as impurities like other fibres (e.g., cellulose) do not interfere. The chromatographic method described by D’Hondt et al. (2020) should be preferred: this method consists of determining chitin content by measuring free acetate, D-glucosamine and N-acetyl-D-glucosamine generated after chitin hydrolysis by applying UPLC-MS/MS. This method allows an accurate determination of the chitin content, without the need to extract and purify chitin or even to derivatize the obtained d-glucosamine. The only step which might need to be optimized is chitin hydrolysis. Hydrolysis conditions strictly depend on the original material, and specific considerations should be attributed to the chitin concentration of the sample. Excessively hydrolytic conditions or long reaction times might result in d-glucosamine degradation, while insufficient time or mild conditions may result in incomplete hydrolysis. Mixing 50 mg of dry insect powder with 5 ml of 6 M HCl for 4-6 h for whole insect flour or 6-8 h for extracted chitin as suggested by D’Hondt et al. (2020) is therefore advised. However, reaction time may be reduced when higher acid concentrations or higher temperatures are applied. Similar results, for example, were obtained by Smets and Van Der Borght (2021a) by using 8 M HCl at 100 °C for 2 h.

Derivatisation procedures are necessary when spectroscopic methods are used. In this case, the main challenge is the low specificity of the spectrometric method. Indeed, the derivation agent may react with compounds other than d-glucosamine, leading to overestimation of the spectrometric reading (Han and Heinonen, 2021). While this can be safely ignored in highly specific chromatographic methods, it represents the main limitation of spectrometric methods. Application of spectrometric methods should therefore always include an initial extraction and purification process. To date, due to the extreme variability of the initial material, no universally applicable method for chitin extraction and purification from edible insects has been described. However, some best practices for extraction of chitin might include the use of insect powder with homogenous particle size as well as the application of an initial defatting step with hexane. Similarly, application of chemical methods rather than enzymatic methods should be preferred as the latter have shown low ability to remove impurities (Pedrazzani et al., 2024).

A further recommendation for correct chitin quantification with spectrometric and chromatographic methods is to include internal validation of the method (Luparelli et al., 2023) with a positive (e.g., commercial chitin) and a negative control (e.g., method blank). In this way, correction for possible interferences can be performed and accurate chitin quantification can be confirmed. The electrophoretic method described by Kvasnicka et al. (2023), although quite promising, is not yet advisable as reference method for chitin due to the low number of investigations carried out. However, its relative simplicity and high performance in early tests suggest that it could develop into a robust standard method in the future.

Nitrogen-free extract: The only chemical parameter of insects that is typically determined mathematically rather than analytically is NFE. As discussed above, NFE is a parameter that calls for careful attention, as any errors incurred in the determination of other nutritional compounds inevitably also compromise the accuracy of NFE values. Nevertheless, in view of the difficulties involved in direct analysis of NFE, mathematical determination is widely accepted in the food and feed sector. The use of analytical methods for water-soluble carbohydrate estimation, which is still hardly studied in insects, will therefore not be discussed in this section.
Reporting

As discussed in the previous sections, particular care during reporting must be given to the ‘Materials and Methods’ section and ensuring that all steps of an analysis are adequately documented to allow re-creation of experimental conditions. Much can already be gained through uniformization of common analytical terminology, at least until standardized methods have been established.

Procedures listed in the ‘Materials and Methods’ section should contain all details necessary to repeat the experiment, including sample pretreatment. For moisture analyses, this includes the obvious parameters drying time and temperature but also less obvious details like the type of oven (e.g., forced-air, vacuum, etc.). Fat extraction protocols should include the type of solvent used, extraction temperature, number of extractions, or in case of Soxhlet: cycles/hour and extraction duration. For protein, amino acid, ash, fibre, and chitin analyses, all necessary details including temperature, duration, instrumental parameters, and, when appropriate, formulas, conversion factors, and equations should be provided. Details of standard materials and equipment used should also be provided. Simply stating an ISO or AOAC procedure for another matrix, or worse stating AOAC in general, should be avoided since there are, at this moment, no standardised methods validated for insect matrices.

In the same scope, clearly reporting the number of replicates and statistics is important as well. This includes specifying whether replicate analyses are biological or technical replicates. Admittedly, most academic journals place limits on the word or page count of the manuscript, forcing researchers in some cases to cut important details. Some academic journals compensate for this limitation by allowing researchers to put part of their ‘Materials and Methods’ section in the ‘Supplementary Information’. It is our general belief that, at least until standardised methods have been established for insect matrices, detailed ‘Materials and Methods’ sections are in many cases as valuable to the field as the specific results of a given study.

Using correct symbols and abbreviations, following IUPAC nomenclature, is also strongly advised for the sake of clarity and for uniformity in research papers across the field. For example, instead of reporting ‘Protein content (%) = 34.12’, reporting the mass fraction (i.e., wprotein) is preferred. Other examples listed in the literature include the use of chitin content crude pellet (preferably: wchitin, crude pellet), % exoskeleton DW fraction for presumably the dry matter content of the exoskeleton (preferably: wdry matter), MW for molecular weight (preferably: M), WRO for the mass of extracted oil (preferably: moil), WOC for the oil content of the insect biomass (preferably: woil), WLMLPs for the mass of insect powder used for the extraction (preferably: minsect powder), etc. In the same scope, the use of ‘mass’ is preferred over ‘weight’ as the latter is typically expressed in Newton (Cohen et al., 2007). Asterisks, (double) dagger symbols, or other footnote symbols in superscript can be used to provide additional information like for example whether the mass fraction is on dry matter basis or on an as is basis (e.g., wdry matter1). This way, alphabetical superscript remains available for highlighting statistically significant differences.

Preferably, results of compositional analyses (i.e., fat, protein contents, etc.) are reported on dry matter basis and, if applicable, the moisture content of the starting material is provided on an as is basis as well. By reporting values on dry matter basis, researchers can look at the underlying chemical composition of the sample without having to consider different moisture contents associated with different insect species or life stages or with the processing and storage of the samples prior to analysis. This is especially important in the scope of formulating new diets or integrating analysis of insect products into existing nutritional databases. In some cases, reporting values on an as is or fresh weight basis can offer advantages, for example in products intended to be eaten fresh. Nevertheless, there is little downside to determining and reporting moisture content of insect samples.
4 Conclusions

In the absence of standardised methods for insect chemical analyses, a variety of analysis techniques is described in the scientific literature. Driven by the insect sector request, specialised institutions or associations like ISO or AOAC should therefore focus their efforts on developing standardised procedures for insect matrices. Nevertheless, already much can be gained through provisional uniformization. To this end, the recommendations for sampling and storage, key proximate analyses, and best practices in terms of reporting listed in earlier sections can hopefully serve as general guideline until official standard methods have been established and validated.

In all cases, accurate reporting, as outlined above, is critical for enabling comparison between research finding and reuse of data. Omission of essential details in the ‘Materials and Methods’ section significantly hampers uniformization and standardisation efforts. As a general recommendation, all parameters or (instrumental) settings which could impact the result should be thoroughly documented in the manuscript. Doing so not only enhances the quality of the work but also facilitates easier interpretation and reuse of data by other researchers. By addressing the gaps described within this chapter, the research community will no longer be bugged by inconsistencies in published data.
*

Corresponding author; e-mail: mik.vanderborght@kuleuven.be
Acknowledgements

This chapter is part of the BugBook project, initiated by the working group on Standardization of methods, parameters, and terminology in insect research of the EAAP Insects commission. This work was supported by KU Leuven internal funding via the research project “CHITILLUCENS” (Grant number KAC2E/24/026); the Research Foundation Flanders (FWO) via the research project EntoBOOST (Grant number S018524N); and the funding measure “Innovation Spaces Bioeconomy”, project “Innovation Space NewFood System” (Project reKultI4Food) (Grant number 031B1206B), founded by the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).